so as you know hopefully we have a our
first midterm exam on Thursday that's
what it says so it's going to be right
here from 340 to 5 please arrive early
because there's not enough space for
everyone no I'm kidding but this
first-come first-serve
but you see we are pretty tight on space
and as I told you I try to get a second
room but I might my request was denied
unfortunately but I think we'll be we'll
manage but but just the you realize
there's so many students so there's a
lot of logistical problems as it is so
just to make this problems a little bit
easier to handle please arrive as early
as you can
well obviously you can't come before
3:30 because there is another class but
if you can arrive shortly after 3:30 and
take your seats they'll be great because
then we'll distribute the exam so we can
start start exactly at 3:40 okay now all
the information about about the exam is
available online and I will not go over
it
now but I just want to mention a couple
of things one is about about what's
called a cheat sheet you will be allowed
to have one page one page of formulas
standard size not this is standard size
it has to be friend rated number one has
to be can written cannot be type it
cannot be a photocopy it has to be done
by you that's the point of this and it
has to be on one side only not on two
sides but on one side only if we see
that somebody has two sides or a much
bigger sheet of paper or something else
we'll have to confiscate it I'm sorry
but we have to be fair to everyone okay
so we'll just apply the same rules if we
see that there is one which does not
conform to the standards we'll have to
take it from you okay
no other materials are allowed no
scratch paper if you need scratch paper
later on an exam you will ask me and
I'll give you some paper but there will
be just one page of formulas on one side
that you will be allowed to have and
then I will distribute with with the TAS
will distribute the exams to you so
you'll have exam on which you will write
your solutions okay
is that clear okay no calculators no
books no nothing no other no scratch
paper okay are there any questions about
the logistical aspects of the exam yes
you can you can write anything you want
on Gigi
as long as it's kind written as long as
written by you okay and written on one
side and on standard size sheet of paper
okay any other questions hi
what is going to record it's a more of a
it's more of a terminological question I
get so if the question not so much about
the exam about this midterm exam but
about the grade or further for the for
the course right because on this exam we
are not going to give you a a grade a
letter grade necessarily we'll see but
the point is that will just give you
rate some ranges maybe for the for the
grade just to give you a ballpark
ballpark figure for the grade okay
you'll get the score so we say five or
six problems so we say fifty or sixty
points maximum and you'll know what your
score is and we'll give you the idea of
where you are and you know in the class
okay but of course this score will be
taken as twenty percent of your of your
final score for this course right and so
when we get the final score then at the
end of the semester we'll look at the
final scores for everybody and we will
then derive the grade and it will be
corrupt in the sense that there are no
predetermined preset ranges the ranges
will depend on how everybody is doing
and how their scores break
okay so in that sense at this course any
other questions about yes I'm sorry
know if you need scratch paper just ask
me pick out even though I should tell
you at the end of the at the end of exam
please put your your piece of paper
sheet the sheet of paper in inside the
exam so we have it okay I'm sorry
oh no all right well you will if you are
if you absolutely have to have it back
just right I need I want to get it back
and keep it for posterity all right so
now we'll talk about now we'll talk
about the material for this meter so
today is the review lecture so what I'm
going to do is I'm going to review the
material and then I will you can ask me
questions so there are very there's
their various resources for your
preparation for the foot exam which are
available online there is a there is a
mock midterm there is the review
problems okay and then there are office
hours so also which are organized by
your by your TA and this is another
resource that you can ask any questions
now there also be office hours right
after this class right here where you
can also continue asking me questions at
that time but first I want to I want to
summarize what we've done so far and
it's been five weeks yes if you really
have to ask me now when tonight tonight
the answers for the previous homework
set right and for the review problems
will be posted tonight are around six
six nine six thirty seven and mock
meeting with no solutions will not be
posted alright but you can ask me about
problems from magnet on now for example
so so I want to summarize what we've
done
want to summarize what we've done in
this course up to now okay
not necessarily in chronological order
but I want to kind of give you a kind of
a bird's-eye view of the of the first
five weeks of this class and so the most
important point from my perspective to
realize here is what exactly are we
doing here okay so we are studying
various objects on the plane and in
space so in other words the ambient
space there is ambient space at the
space where all of those objects live
okay
and that could be that's either plane
which we also denote by r2 or space and
we denote by r3 and in this engine speed
objects which are one-dimensional or
two-dimensional that's the essence of
this course and we've done quite quite a
bit in this in this plane already so let
me summarize what we've done first I
want to talk about the one-dimensional
objects the one-dimensional objects are
also known as curve so the first the
first topic that we have studied is is
it is a curve on the plane and in space
in other words curves in r2 and r3
so what did we talk about what what did
we how did we study them well we figured
out that there were two major ways of
representing curves okay
one is we can represent them in
parametric form or in other words
parametric representation because the
curve is one dimensional we need one
extra parameter one next parameter say T
okay and then we write we write
represent the curve in the following way
we write each coordinate as a function
of that variable that additional
variable T so X would be some function f
of T and Y would be some function G of e
[Music]
if we work on the plane in r2 that's all
because you only have two coordinates
right but if we work in space in
three-dimensional space then we have a
third coordinate so I'll put it in
brackets that would be in case we have a
third coordinate that would be a third
function so that's primary
representation
so an example of this example of this
would be say X is equal to cosine T and
Y is equal to sine T one of the first
examples we looked at this is I'm
looking at the two-dimensional case so
there is no third coordinate so in this
case this is a certain C presents a
circle in r2 of radius one and you see
here that it's important also to to keep
track of the range of the parameter T so
if you really want to get a circle you
have specified the T is between 0 & 2 pi
Z so then it's really a circle otherwise
in principle you get if you don't
specify this as if you allow this
variable to go beyond this range that
means that you'll have to wrap around
the circle many times so when you do
parametric representation keep track of
what the limits are for this variable T
okay so that's the first one the second
way to represent a curve
is by means of of an equation and I'll
just first a Cartesian equation in R 2
in the case when the curve is on the
plane it can be represented by one
equation with respect to the two
coordinates x and y cartesian Cartesian
refers to the standard coordinate system
which we which we draw x and y because
of the French mathematician it flows for
Dakar encode Cartesian so Cartesian
equation in our two example circle
square plus y square equals 1 at the
same circle as our we as the one which
presented over there in the parametric
form can also be represented by this one
equation on the plane okay note that in
r3 in r3 if we are in three-dimensional
space we would need two equations two
equations because the dimension of the
ambient space is now three and so to get
to a curve we have to drop dimension by
two so we have to impose two can
constraints or two conditions two
equations and for this reason we don't
we usually do not use do not use this
this form this presentation two
equations but sometimes sometimes it
happens so an example is intersection of
two serve two surfaces this is in the
homework there are a couple of exercises
like that where you are given two
surfaces and then each surface each is
given by an equation each is given by
one equation
and so if you have intersection of two
surfaces it means that you have to
impose this two equation simultaneously
when you impose this two equations
simultaneously you will describe the
intersection and intersection of two
surfaces is usually a curve so that's
why a curve would be then described by
two equations so that's that's
essentially how the this kind of pairs
of equations show up showed up in our
studies so far because we talked about
intersections of two surfaces and that
intersection being a curve but I'll talk
about this later well now when we talk
about more general surfaces occurs okay
so that's Cartesian so use the Cartesian
equations our R and R 2 because it's
just 1 in r3 it will be two equations
and normally we would just prefer to
write a parametric form where you just
need one parameter it's really a matter
of continues okay now on the plane we
also have another standard coordinate
systems or polar coordinates and
oftentimes course can be represented
nicely by using polar coordinates polar
coordinates this is also in R 2 on a
plane so example I mean representing
curves in polar coordinates so an
example of such a curve would be some
like R equals cosine theta
which would be as we know it's going to
be a circle which is centered at one
half of radius one on the X plane so
that's an equation that's an equation in
Cartesian coordinate in Cartesian
coordinates but in polar coordinates so
it represents a curve but using a
different system of coordinates I mean
surely we we have much more complicated
examples for example you could put 1
plus cosine theta and it will look very
different or you can put cosine 2 theta
or cosine 3 theta and there are there
were multiple exercises in this in this
direction in in a homework and Rita
we also discussed them in class ok so
that's another way of representing
curves on on a plane
now the next we look at the v class of
curves which are the simplest curves
both in on the plane and in space and
those are the lines simplest curves in
other words up to now we're talking
about the general methods how to
represent curves now I'm talking about a
particular particular classes of curves
and the simple class of course is lines
and lines we learn how to represent in
different ways and the standard wave is
a dramatic way romantic representation
romantic representation which we write
like this R is equal to R 0 plus V so
here is the parameter and our 0 is the
position vector of a particular point on
this on this line right
so here's the line and so that's our
zero position vector of a particular
point on this on this line and V is a
vector along this line okay so these are
the two pieces of data that you need to
to give a coordinate representation of
parametric representation for for a line
you need the point and you need a vector
which goes along this line now here
already we're using vectors so this was
I don't want to separate this a separate
topic vectors in a way it's it's really
some technique that we learned to deal
with two-dimensional two-dimensional
space an object in two-dimensional and
three-dimensional spaces it's very
convenient because if you use vectors
you can you can add them up and we saw
how by using this additional vectors and
also multiplication of vector by a
scalar we can represent all points along
this line in one stroke so to speak with
by by by this formula r0 plus VT but if
you wish you can write everything in
components you can write out zero at
some point as x0 y0 and z0 remember this
is notation we use for vectors this
angle brackets as opposed to the round
brackets for for the for the for the
point and it's not just you know to be
pedantic and to make everyone's life
complicated by
there is a explain to multiplication
there is a big difference between
vectors and points right for example
points we cannot add up and vectors we
can add up
so but once you have a point you can
draw a vector from the origin to this
point and that's that's the position
vector so essentially just means
changing the round round brackets by the
angle breaks and if we write V as ABC
then this formula can also be written in
components just like this so the upshot
of all this is that all you need to know
to write down an equation of a line is a
point on that line in the vector along
this line that's all and once you know
them you put them in this very simple
formula and that's that's the parametric
representation so these are line general
curves are more complicated there in
that this formulas will show up on the
right-hand sides are more complicated
this is a simple simple functions in one
variable linear functions last constant
function but in general you have more
complicated expressions like T squared
or higher powers of T or trigonometric
functions or whatever okay nevertheless
no matter what your curve is you can
always approximate this curve by by a
line in the neighborhood of a given
point and that's that sort of the major
one of the major ideas that we've
discussed up to now
which is linear approximation linear
approximation in other words you can
approximate complicated curvy objects by
simple linear ones in the neighborhood
of a given point not everywhere
simultaneously not everywhere at once
but in a neighborhood of a given point
you can do that and what what this
amounts to in the case of course is
finding tangent tangent line tangent
vectors and tangent lines of course this
means to finding tangent lines tangent
vectors and tangent lines to general
curves and I want to emphasize at a
given point because if you change the
point of course the tangent line is
going to be different so let's say here
a curve could be something you
complicate like this and then this would
be tangent line so the curve itself
would be given by this equations x
equals f of T y equals G of T and V
equals H of T and there will be some
value t0 which will correspond to X two
point x0 y0 and z0 that's a point on
this curve and then you can be asked to
to write down the equation for tangent
for the tangent line at this point and
the way you do this is by taking the
derivative of the vector function which
is obtained by combining these two
functions so the tangent vector V would
be just
X prime of T DT 0 Y prime of T 0 and Z
prime at Z 0 or in other words what we
can call our prime of T and once you
have this me okay
then you can write down the equation of
this line so this is tangent vector is
some tangent vector and the tangent line
will then be given by the equation R is
equal to R 0 R 0 being again as before
being a point with the position vector
of X 0 y 0 Z 0 plus this V times the
parameter and this at this point you
just I want to emphasize that there is
no reason to use the same parameter key
in fact it's better not to use the same
parameter key because if you use it it
kind of you kind of implicitly
suggesting and so this were the same
parameter as a parameter for the
original curve which it is not the
tangent line and the curve are unrelated
except that just in a very small
neighborhood of this point they're very
close to each other so here it is much
better to to emphasize the fact that
they are unrelated and to use a
different parameter for example can use
letter s so it's a different now I want
to emphasize I want emphasize that this
is a different parameter that clear
okay question oh yes yeah well so so
what this means is this means the
derivative evaluated at t 0 right that's
what I mean after that I take this V
this particular V and I write the
equation in this form I can I want to
call it s you can call it something
anything else any other letter you like
but I want to emphasize that it
shouldn't be the same as T because then
it's confusing because then it looks
like there's some connection between the
two curves the curve itself and the
tangent line right but there isn't a
connection
the could think of this parameter T say
as a time time which you know the time
along the curve so let's say there is a
there's a bug which is which is a
traveling along this curve and at this
function this position functions F G and
H that would correspond to the position
of that bug at the point at the time T
right well then there is another bug
which is traveling along the tangent
line and these bugs don't know each
other the only thing is that they kind
of they don't even necessarily come in
contact with each other right because
because you see this point because when
one of them is here the other one could
be somewhere else right because it they
have different time scales and different
time parameters you know different
clocks so so all this curve this point
corresponds to T equal to zero right but
on the tangent line this point
corresponds to s equal zero because when
s is equal to 0 the second term drops
out vs drops out so what you have is
just R 0 so the second bug is here when
when his or her time shows 0 right
whereas the other one is here
at the time t0 and so there's no
connection between the two the point of
tangent line is to have a line which is
the simplest curve simplest possible
curved approximating in the best
possible way our original curve in the
neighborhood of that point but it
doesn't mean that when we parameterize
them that the perimeter ization
themselves should be related to each
other instead I mean okay any other
questions so so these are this a tangent
lines and by the way there this includes
for example the issue of the slope when
we talked about parametric curves at the
beginning when we talked about
parametric curves on the plane we didn't
talk about tangent lines we talked about
the slope of the tangent line but of
course the slope of the tangent line can
be easily found in a case of a curve and
in case of a line on the plane from
these equations okay so that's more or
less
the outline of of the material that we
learn about curves there is one more
sort of a subtopic here which is
applications of course so there are
various kind of quantities we learned
how to compute related to curves so
there are very thing to grow more
precise here various integrals so you've
got you've got the arc length right you
got area under the grill under the curve
or end area enclosed by by some by some
curves and close the area that's called
this area and also surface revolution
surface area so these are their various
integrals which you can set up related
to curves and this and of course this is
something you need to know that this
varies form you list involved here okay
but that that takes care of of the
one-dimensional object on the plane and
in space and as you see I kind of
organized all this material in under one
umbrella topic whereas in fact we
studied we studied this material in a
slightly different way so not
necessarily exactly in exactly the same
way because we first talked about planes
and then three dimensional space but I
want to emphasize the fact that actually
there is not so much of a difference the
way curves are on the plane and in space
is actually very similar revolution
surface I didn't want to say the word
revolution
the big brother is watching so I will be
careful but you know what any okay now
next next is surfaces right so these are
one-dimensional objects and next we talk
about surfaces surfaces are
two-dimensional objects and curves is
live in our three because we can sit you
can see you know basketball in a play in
a plane in a two-dimensional space it
has to be it has to live in
three-dimensional space dimension one
higher so what about surfaces so
surfaces as far as the presentation of
surfaces is they are given by one
Cartesian equation given by one
Cartesian equator so remember for for
curves they are given by one parameter
parametric form or they we have to use
we have to do two two equations in r3
but now for services is the other way
around we need the one equation but if
you if you want to do a parametric form
we'd have to choose two parameters so
that means that it's more economical to
use Cartesian equations to describe the
surface by an equation as opposed to
using parameters so but I believe it
I leave this little note we need two
parameters two parameters now and in
fact this is something we will do later
on in this course when we talk about
various double and triple integrals we
will have to parameterize curves but for
now we don't really we don't really use
this method we exclusively parameter
represents surfaces by equations by
single equation instead of writing
points on the surface by in
of two parameters and so what comes next
is different examples different examples
of surfaces right and once again once
again the simplest one
the simplest class is planning consists
of linear ones which are planes
it was class okay so what do what do we
need to know to represent a plane to
represent a plane we need we need a
point and and a normal vector as I
remember we saw in one of the most
memorable images from this course so far
you have a normal vector to this plane
and you have a point and this is
sufficient information to describe all
the points on the plane right so let me
draw it here so this is a plane and
let's say this is a this is a normal
vector
you can see blue oh so now I know when I
when I want to leave a sublime and blind
message on the board I know which we
should talk to use alright so which
which do you see the white eyes I hope
you see although today today the board
is very wide so it's let's see I've got
yellow and I got green green yeah I
think we we are all concerned about the
environment right so let's use green is
that better
okay all right so we we exile the blue
we exiled a little job no more only one
only one I want to write something that
you don't see now so we have a normal
vector this is a normal vector and again
we have a point we need we need to
choose a point in both cases lines and
and and planes now this n this n is
usually written as ABC but I want to
write it as ABC because we already used
ABC for four lines I just want to
emphasize that this is a different type
of vector okay so let me write and g
okay and so then the equation the
equation of the plane is simply G times
X minus X 0 2 plus e times y minus y0
plus F times C minus 0 ok so that's the
equation which actually we derived by
using dot product in the first place but
I don't want to repeat this this now is
there is a very simple way to explain
why this it's precisely represents all
the points on the plane so this is an
equation on the variables XY and Z where
we're all other quantities are given
this is gef our coordinates or
components of the normal vector so they
should be given and likewise x0 y0 and
z0 are the coordinates of a point and
they should also be given you can
rewrite this by opening opening the
brackets okay so you can rewrite this by
opening the bracket so what you can do
is isolate the terms with XY and z so
you will get DX plus ey plus FZ equals
something
EEF G okay where where G is X e its Rd
if X 0 plus ey 0 plus F Z 0
right so this is a number it's a
particular number so the reason I'm
writing this is sometimes you can be
asked to fill in question your suppose
you're given a plane let's say you have
a plane 4x plus y plus 3z equals 5 okay
so and you can be asked what is the
normal vector to this what is the normal
vector so you just look at the equation
and you see right away what the normal
vector is because these are precisely
the coefficients in front of the
variables X Y Z these are the components
of that vector so for instance you could
be asked here is the equation of a plane
write down the equation a parametric
equations for for the line which is
which is normal to this to this plane in
which passes through a particular point
so then what should you be thinking you
should be thinking what do I need to
know to write down an equation of a line
to write an equation of a line I need a
point and I need a vector the direction
vector okay so the point let's say will
be given so then how do I find out what
the direction vector is welding right
the line is supposed to be in this
setting supposed to be perpendicular so
the direction vector of the line is a
normal vector to the plane and now the
point is that you can find you can see
it right away when you look at the
equation it's 4 4 1 3 is the normal
vector right so the the equation
contains all the information that you
need and that's how you can always
that's how you can you should approach
this kind of problems to write down the
equation of a plane you need to know the
normal vector but conversely if you
already have the equation of the plane
you can immediately find out what the
normal vector is by just looking at the
coefficient yes
what else would you need to do is rather
than find a parallel line right how
would you line the line parallel - well
so - to find a line just to find a line
parallel to a plane is not a
well-defined question right because
there are many parallel lines - a plane
passing through a given point right
let's say if you have a point -
somewhere here and you want to look
there is there is a parallel plane to
this plane passing through this point so
let's say this piece of paper would be
represent will be part of that plane but
inside inside that plane there are many
many lines which you can always say a
parallel to this plane so you so you
can't be asked write down the equation
of a parallel line you can be a spread
around the equation of a parallel plane
you see now that is actually good
question let's suppose let's suppose
you're asked to write down the equation
of a plane which is parallel to this one
and which passes through so parallel
plane passing through through the point
1 2 3 doesn't matter just taking random
numbers ok what is the equation of that
plane well since this plane is parallel
to the original one they share normal
vectors right the normal vectors are the
same so I might as well use the same
normal vectors as for the original plane
which would be 4 1 & 3 right so those
two planes will have to share the
left-hand side objects of this equations
will have to have the same left-hand
side the only thing that could be
different is the right-hand side and how
do I find the right-hand side well for
that I use the second piece of
information the second piece of
information is that this plane contains
this part
the point so for this particular point
the right-hand side should be equal to
the expression I get when I substitute
the coordinates of that point right if I
sub C the coordinates of that on that
point I get 4 times 1 plus 2 Plus 3
times 3 which is what 4 plus 6
4 plus 2 6 plus 9 15 so the equation is
just 4x plus y plus 3z they put 15
whereas the original one was equal to 5
right in fact so all the planes which
have the same left-hand side but
different right-hand side will represent
planes which are all parallel to each
other but they will pass through
different points only one of them will
pass through a particular point for
example the point 1 2 3 but it's very
easy to find the equation of the plane
which passes through that point by
simply substituting the coordinates of
that point like I said yes so again the
finding there is not a single
perpendicular plane to flying right the
condition of being perpendicular would
would uniquely define a line a line this
is say through a given point there is a
unique to a given point on a plane there
is a unique line which is perpendicular
to and we just discussed to find that
line you just need to know a normal
vector but the normal vector you can
find out right away right from this now
there is another question that we can be
asked is suppose your intersect two
planes and find out the equation of the
line right so that's a little more
tricky so here you have to take the
cross product of the normal vectors so
there are kinds of yes if you're given a
line okay so that's very good
so the there's a question also another
question that can be asked is relative
positions of line and planes right so
here it sits so this bicycle question
I'm asked is about relative position of
a line in the plane so let's suppose you
have your given equation of a plane
GX plus let's actually let's take this
one again so for X plus y plus Q G goes
5 and then told you have a line it's
like 1 let's say 1 plus 2 key and then
here will be negative 1 minus T and Z is
2 plus and so so this is typical these
are typical equations for a line in a
plane and you can be asked say do this
line and plane intersect or are they
parallel to each other because these are
they need to do on the options right if
you have a have a plane and you have
some line the line either is going to
intersect somewhere this plane or it's
going to be parallel to it or actually
there is one more option where it
actually may be part of this play and
how do you find out well it's very
simple you simply substitute this a
parametric equations into this formula
and you see whether you can find a
solution for T for this equation if
there are no solutions it means that
they never intersect right if there is a
solute if there is a unique solution
means they intersect at one point in if
the equation is satisfied for all values
of T that means it just belongs to it so
in this case we'll have 4 times 1 plus
2t plus y plus sorry plus negative 1
minus plus 3 times plus T equals 5 okay
so we open the brackets we get 4 + 8 t
minus 1 minus plus 6 plus 3 so we get
did I make mistakes
for +80 that's right
yeah I hope you do it better than I and
then I do on Thursday 4 plus ATS okay
now we've so this is 40 with these three
terms so that that gives us 10 and 4
minus 1 plus 6 gives us 9 right because
5 so 10 T is equal to negative 6 so
there is a unique solution which is
six-step named minus negative 6 6 over
10 what did I do
ok it's one of those days so minus
negative 4 over 10 but I'm glad that
you're paying attention that's a good
sign negative 2 over 5 okay
so what could happen is that it could
happen that the all the terms with T
disappear it could happen that they all
cancel each other out and then you get a
number on the left hand side and number
on the right hand side and then two
things could happen they're either the
same in which case it means that the
equation is satisfied for all values of
T which means that the line belongs to
the plane or it may be say some like v
equals 6 which is wrong which is false
and therefore the equation is not
satisfied for any value of T that means
that they're parallel someone was asking
want to ask me question yes I answered
your question
ok good so but as you see the most
likely generic case in a more generic
case there will be some nonzero
coefficient in front of T and then there
will be unique solutions so generically
a line and a plane will intersect but
sometimes it could happen that they
cancel out all right so where were we
I talked about simplest class of
surfaces namely planes and various
questions that could be asked about
planes but these are not the only source
that we have studied we have also
studied quadric surfaces
surfaces which are given by quadratic
equations okay so the next the next
example is here he is quadric surfaces
and for quadric surfaces we have a
equation where like this except now we
allow second Fowler's squares x squared
Y squared also mixed throw the flag X Y
or Y Z okay so what you need to know
here is that that we can we can break
that all of those quadric surfaces break
into several major groups okay and what
and how to tell whether given equation
describes a surface in that group and
what are the sort of the quality
features of that of that group so you've
got here and ellipsoid and you've got
hyperboloids of two different types and
you've got power below it or two
different types okay so you have to be
able to tell by looking at the equation
as to what it represents positively you
don't have to necessarily to you know to
leave you will not be asked to draw up
what is called a hyperbolic paraboloid
okay that's that's not that's not we
don't that's not the goal to kind of to
test your drawing skills the goal is to
see that you realize you understand the
difference between different different
equations that describe quadric surfaces
and what are the terms salient features
of different products sources all right
by the way when I talked about when I
talked about quadric surfaces I did not
mention two important class two
important groups of quadric surfaces so
in addition to the ones before in
addition to the ones discussed before
we have this cylinder so we have these
two classes to learn is called cylinders
and cylinders are a services which which
which are described by equations in
which one of the variables is not
involved so you could have for example x
squared plus y squared equals one so the
business variable Z is not present in
the equation and it's very easy to
represent this you just look you just
draw the corresponding curve on the
plane which is spent which corresponds
to these two coordinates which are
involved in this particular case it's a
circle and then you sort if you take
this you think of this as a frame and
then you kind of you move that frame
parallel to the z axis and the surface
you get by sweep by sweeping you know
which will be swept by by this by this
frame by this curve will be your surface
so that's the in this case that's
exactly the cylinder right so that's why
they're called cylinders even though
they the original frame doesn't
necessarily have to be a circle it could
be hyperbola for example or a parabola
so you'll get sort of a parabolic
surfaces you think of them as kind of
cookie cutters you know that you just
have a certain shape that you want to
cut and then in and you make a cylinder
out of that shape so that's what those
cylinders are and and the second one is
second sort of class of surfaces which
we didn't talk about in class but I want
to mention because they're all so
important at the cones okay so the
simplest example of a cone is given by
this equation C squared equals x squared
plus y squared and that
[Music]
let's given by this by this picture well
I sort of self-explanatory because if
it's called the cone and it looks like a
cone
except it's sort of a double cone when
you draw it like this it's a double cone
in the sense that Z could be both
positive and negative and there is a
basic symmetry between the upper half of
this cone and the lower half of this
point of this cone if you flip the sign
of Z the equation will not change
because the square will kill that sign
anyway right so that's why it has to it
has this two part so these are the cones
okay so planes and quadric surfaces are
the two classes of surfaces we have
studied in greater detail than the more
general surfaces and for more general
surfaces we have discussed linear
approximation so again I want you to see
I would like you to know to see then I
appreciate this analogy for course we
talk about linear approximation of
curves by tangent lines and for surfaces
we talk about linear approximation of
general surfaces by tangent planes and
just like in the case of just like in
the case of tangent lines we have a very
efficient method for writing down the
equation of the tangent plane
[Applause]
so tangent planes so what you need to
know here is that if you have a graph of
a function in two variables V equals f
of X Y and you have a point X 0 y 0 half
of x 0 y 0 which we'll call z 0 then you
should be able to write down the
equation of the tangent plane to this to
the surface at this point okay and the
way you do it is so that it's actually
very similar to the equation for tangent
lines we talked about this last time
so the equation specifically looks like
this right well so we have two partial -
partial derivatives of the function f F
sub X and F sub y evaluated at this
point this is the equation of this is a
tangent plane all the tangent plane
to the graph okay you can also be asked
to write down the equation of a normal
line of a normal line to the to the
graph what do I mean by normal line
that's the line which passes through the
same point and which is perpendicular to
this tangent plane right and which I
just we just talked about how to write
down equations of normal lines you see
and for normal lines what you need to do
is you need to keep track of the
coefficients in front of x y&z right so
what are these creations let me actually
do it right here so you see in this if I
this is a nice way to write it but if I
want to write it in a way we usually
write I have to put all variables on the
same side so instead of writing like
this I would have to write f sub X X
minus x0 plus F sub y y minus y0 and
then I would have to take the other guy
to this side also so that means the
coefficient here is negative one so what
so what is the normal vector then that's
this green and this green vector that we
talked about earlier it's just F sub X
x0 y0 F sub y and take 0 y 0 negative 1
so that's a normal vector
and now you can write down the equation
of a normal line by using this as a
direction vector for that normal line
right what do we need to write down
equation of a line we need to know a
starting point and we need to know the
direction vector so the starting point
is given it's x0 y0 and z0 where z0 is
again just a value of the function at x0
y0 and then and the vector the direction
vector is just this numbers FX of x 0 y
0 FY of m 0 y 0 and negative 1 and then
you have to choose a coordinate along
this time is along this normal line and
so let's again use s and as before is
the second at some color but you can use
in this case you can use T because we
haven't used T in this in the setup yet
so ok so this is the equation of the
normal line or prime attic
representation more precisely of the
normal line so that's basically that's
most of it that's like 90% of the
material we've done and then there are
what we've also did last week last week
we started to discuss various aspects of
the different just general these aspects
of differential calculus and the first
topic we discussed here or limb with
limits right so I kind of have to it
doesn't quite fit in either surfaces or
lines so I'd have to start I would have
to start a different a different topic
that would be three all right and so
that would be elements of the
differential calculus this is something
which we will continue to work on for
the next couple of weeks
and here we have limits we talked about
limits different aspects of limit and
continue achieve and then we also talked
about partial derivatives and finally we
talked about the differential although
the differential the notion of
differential is of course as I explained
in great detail last time it's very
closely related to the notion of tangent
plane tangent plane is a graph of the
differential so if you understand
tangent planes you understand the
differentials as well so that's that's
roughly the summary at some summary of
the material we've done so far and now
we have a few minutes left so you can
ask some questions any questions
will there be a epsilon-delta blueproof
proofs on exam the answer's no there
will be no ads on Delta proofs but you
have to know as you can see you on a on
a mock midterm
there's question about showing that the
limit does not exist right so you should
be able to to give an argument why it
does not exist yes what about proving
that the limit does exist that would be
only in the case when it can be reduced
to one dimensional case and where you
could use one of the results from one
dimensional cultures okay on the mock
midterm number four
okay so it will take so it will take me
some time so maybe I will let me ask
even see if somebody has sort of a
shorter question and I will get back to
this okay all right so you were asking
oh well there is one problem so the
question is what what kind of problems
for existence of a limit should we know
a good example is a problem on the
homework in that section where the limit
can be written in polar coordinates
so the function could be written in
terms of x squared plus y squared and
then it becomes some like R squared
times logarithm of our so that's exactly
kind of example I have in mind
nothing nothing else no no not good not
squish there okay go ahead will there be
true and false questions possibly let
represents the parameter of S is a
parameter it could be you could use
letter G for example okay
hyperbolic oh you hyperbolic
trigonometric functions you know you
don't need to stage click to know them
okay yes I'm sorry
Oller drawings would you the question is
whether you would have to sketch polar
drawings polar drawings are fair game
because we we studied them in class
right and there are lots of in lots of
them on homework of course I will not
ask you to do something incredibly
complicated but something very basic
like R equals cosine theta equals cosine
to theta R equals one plus cosine theta
is something that you definitely should
be able to do right okay second yes I
see I don't know yeah it's actually know
what guys
huh I don't know maybe it's not a good
idea maybe you would rather meet without
me talking keep talking because I
thought that you know you might be
interested in some of the questions you
or your colleagues have you know because
some of them might open something for
you as well so but if we cannot do it if
people talk to each other right
oh you mean for for limits right so for
the limits are already played that you
could have some homework you have this
function x squared plus y squared times
something like this much maybe not
exactly but something very similar is
that what you're asking so in this case
you should be able to explain why there
is a limit when when x and y goes to 0
because the way you argue is by saying
that in terms of polar coordinates this
is R squared times logarithm of R
squared and so it effectively so this
limit when XY go to 0 zero means that R
goes to zero so effectively answering
this question is simply equivalent to
answering the same question but for this
function one variable and therefore you
can use the methods of one variable
calculus and method of our one verbal
caucus here is the lobsters rule right
so you can easily do it by love causal
this is something you need to know I in
principle since this kind of problem was
on homework
I did sir game ok yes next what exactly
is perimeter
parameter what exactly the parameter in
the parametric curves right so the
question is what exactly is the
parameter in the parameter curves
well so to answer this we look at the
general curve say in r3 in space okay
and what does it mean to parameterize it
well for me the easiest way to think
about it this is followed so think of
this think of this curve physica is a
rope which is which is somewhat somehow
hanging in the air okay like here's a
here is the curve train but it could be
complicated like it but if it is if it
is a rope you can always just stretch it
just stretch it out and make it into a a
line right you can always just
straighten it out not stretch not
stretch it straighten it out that's what
I mean just straighten it out and make
it a straight line when you make it into
a straight line you can introduce
measure and couldn't try this
measurement on it you can just pick a
point and say this point zero and after
that you'll have you know one inch two
inch and so on see if you can you can
put a measurement on it but if you could
do that to the to this curve when you
straighten it out it means that you can
just mark mark each point each point
will have a certain distance from a
given point zero so that's the parameter
key then you think of then you put it
back where it were but now each point
has a parameter so that's what I mean by
by parameter you see what I mean this is
like parameterizing we are not surprised
by the fact that we have a measurement
measuring instruments that they are
parameterize in other words when we
measure
each point on this little ruler you know
it has a marker right but that's because
usually we mark things on straight lines
so here we deal with something which is
not straight what I'm trying to explain
is that there is so much of a difference
between the two because even if you have
a complicated curve you can always
straighten it out and then you can view
it you can apply you can apply the same
procedure to it as as to a straight line
and so then you can mark each point by
certain by a certain number right and
that's this X that's this extra
coordinate all right anything else
okay that's made of a metaphysical
question so that's optical question are
they going to be are the problems going
to be harder than the homework on
average I think they will be about the
same as homework I'm at least I aim them
to be about the same level it's homework
on average but but it's something in the
eye of the beholder right what is hard
and what is they're not going to be much
harder in any case same kind of problems
I think that the Mach the reason why I
fall I posted the mock midterm is
precisely to give you an idea what kind
of problems I would consider putting on
an exam right so I think that gives you
an idea and speaking of which let me go
back to the question about number four
number four I haven't forgotten number
four on on the mock midterm
I'm very I'm very proud of this of this
question because it combines so many
different things it's too bad I cannot
use it now in the midterm but might be
something similar I am certainly not
putting this problem with mr. now sir
after I explain it but okay so let's
calm down so do you want me to want to
hear the solution or not yes okay but
then let's just let's look what we calm
down a little bit all right so stage you
have to first sketch this surface so so
see I'm going to do it now in real time
because of course I don't remember I
don't remember what the surfaces look
like and I'm just trying to I'm going to
just try to guess so first of all I see
that there is one plus into - right
right and so but I don't remember which
one is it is it dealt with the one which
with two parts or with one part so how
do I tell the way I would sell of course
you can you will have you one way to do
it is to to write it all of this on your
on your cheat sheet but then you then
you will be using very valuable space
for this whereas in fact you can very
easily deduce this by just looking at it
and what I see is if you take the Y
squared and Z squared to the right hand
side so it's 1 plus y squared 4 squared
4 right so what you see is that this is
greater than or equal to 1 all right
greater than equal to one so that means
that if X if X is between negative 1 and
1 there is no chance that I can solve
this right so that means there is a gap
there is a break the x equals 0 play at
x equals 0 plane x equals 0 plane
separates two pieces two pieces of this
graph and now I see that this is a
hyperboloid
with two parts right so and the X equal
zero plane is the Y Z plane the Y Z
plane so that means this is one like
this which will be exactly the point 1
and then the second one which is at
negative 1 like this like this right so
that's the bit that's the way I will
draw this picture now well there is this
1 over 4 but just to sketch it it
doesn't really matter right so that's
the first thing you need to do second we
want to compute the surface area of the
part of the surface bounded by the
planes X equal 1 and X equal square root
of 5 over 2 so here is x equals 1 and x
equals square root of 5 over 2 is
something which is just above 1 and why
did I choose square root of 5 over 2
because because then if I look at the
plane x equals square root of 5 over 2 I
will get and I intersect that plane and
this hyperboloid I will get a circle
right and what is that circle so it will
be square root of 5 over 2 squared
equals 1 plus y squared over 4 well
let's just write it here so this will be
like 5 over 4 equals this which means
y squared over four plus Z squared over
4 equals 1/4 so that means Y squared
plus Z squared equals 1 ok so that's
that's the circle and now to compute the
area I want to represent this as a area
as a surface of revolution evolution
right so now a revolution of what it
will be a revolution of this of this
curve in the in the XZ plane right so I
just have to draw this curve of course
you have to remember that I have to look
at it not from this perspective but from
the back of the of the blackboard so
that X goes from left to right if I look
like this that goes from right to left
but I want it to go from left to right
so actually it's going to start at 1 and
it's going to go like this right so in
fact what I want to do is I want to set
to say if you want it could be maybe
it's better to do an XY plane let's do
it the next white line so to do it an XY
plane I have to put Z equal 0 in this
formula so I put Z equal 0 ok and so
what I get is x squared minus y squared
over 4 equals 1 right so that that's
actually hyperbola that's a hyperbola
it's part of the hyperbola
so what I'm saying is that I want to go
from one to square root of five over two
and then the formula for that
[Music]
the formula for for the for the surface
area is going to be 2 pi Y right 2 pi Y
times square root of DX DT squared plus
dy DT squared so this will be from well
I have to take from alpha to beta where
I would have to write some parameters
ation for it I'll have to write some
privatization for this for this curve
and as X is some F of T and Y is some G
of T right and so he will be from some
alpha to beta and right and then I have
to take this integral does everyone
agree with this okay so now the only
thing I think I'm afraid this time I'm
out of time so I'm still by the bell but
so I feel I feel as though I should let
people go but I will be happy to
continue and explain the rest after a
five-minute break during the office
hours okay so so let's stop here and
good luck on Thursday so I'll see you on
Thursday 3:30 exam starts at 3:40 and
now we have office hours